Testing, one, two, three.
This is an interview with Dr. A.K. Ayub, currently
a professor in the Department of Electrical
Engineering at Texas A&M. Dr. Ayub, could you tell
us a little bit about your early years? I was born in
Egypt in 1927. I attended my primary school, got my
school education after B.Sc. in electrical
engineering in Egypt, and then I came to the United
States in 1949 on a scholarship to work for a Ph.D.,
a scholarship from the Egyptian government. I got
my degree in 1955,
and I did do some work for General Electric in 55 and
56. Then I went to Egypt in 56. Is this early enough?
Yeah, that's fine. Okay, what were your parents'
occupations? My father is a retired man now. He's
in his 80s and used to be a judge. A judge? Okay. How
did your interest in electrical engineering
develop? It developed in the late 30s and early
40s. There was talk in Egypt about constructing
high dams and electric generation from hydro
plants and the like. And I thought that was very
fascinating, so I did do it there. When did you get
your Ph.D.? When? Yeah. In 1955, January 1955,
University of Texas in Austin. Okay. What did you
do your doctoral dissertation on? My
dissertation was on federal residents on power
systems. Okay. From 1955 until 1961, you worked
for the Ministry of Public Works in Cairo, Egypt,
in the Mechanical and Engineering Department.
What positions did you hold there? I was a project
engineer when I got there after my scholarship,
and then I climbed the ladder and I became
what is translated as General Inspector. I was a
chief engineer for a while, and then I was a general
manager for a while, until 1961, in power
generation and distribution. Could you compare
engineering in Egypt and the United States? Oh,
yeah.
Comparing engineering as such is not a very
precise thing. You see, Egypt had very strong ties
with the United Kingdom for the last 100 years. And
most of the electrical installations,
electrical practices and codes are more or less
the British standard.
So, you can say that We're closer to the European
practices than we are to the States. As you know,
the States is the only place in the world with 60
cycle businesses.
Other than that, same kind of practices. When you
left the Ministry of Public Works in 1961, you went
to work for the Atomic Energy Establishment also
in Cairo. Why did you make this move? Well, see, in
the late 50s, The research and the lust, the
glamour, the whole field is changing. Power
systems were very stagnant in the way of research.
And electronics was coming up in one area, you
know, this kind of thing. I felt at the time that, I
was 35 at the time, I left about 35 years of age, And I
felt like it was time to change a little bit. So I did
contact and almost came to North Carolina State
for a Ph.D. in nuclear physics on my own, just
coming back from a study leave and getting a Ph.D.
in physics. And it just so happened before I left
for this newer education, Some people approached
me from the Atomic Energy establishment in Egypt
and asked me if I would participate with them in the
development of a nuclear power program for Egypt.
And when I mentioned that I was on my way to the
States to get more education in nuclear physics,
just to happen that way, they offered an
alternative. They offered me the alternative of
going to the Soviet Union. They sent me to the
Soviet Union. to get my nuclear engineering
education there, and that they'd send me to
England. And they did. So I went to the reactor
schools, and one was in Moscow called the
Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy. And then
later on, I went to the Harvard Reactor School in
England, Atomic Energy Establishment of
Harvard. At the time, there were no nuclear
engineering departments in universities or
such. The only nuclear education you'd get would
be if you were a mechanical or electrical engineer
or a physicist maybe. You can come to the States and
go to one of the five national labs, Argonne
National Lab and Oak Ridge. or go to England to
Harvard, as they did, and go to the Soviet Union to .
So there were no departments at the time. There
were no degrees in nuclear engineering. So that's
how I got involved in that. I came back from all
these
educational missions, and I did take part with
them in the planning of the first nuclear power
plants and nuclear desalination versions. in
Egypt. At the time, if your people would remember,
you would not. Eisenhower had a plan called the
Eisenhower Plan in which he suggested to build a
large complex of nuclear power in the Sinai Desert
and have a joint operation of it by Egypt and
Israel. It was one way of getting Egypt and Israel
to have peace. is for Eisenhower to offer that
America would build a nuclear power plant that
would use nuclear energy to produce electrical
power and enough heat to desalt seawater and use it
for irrigation for the Sinai Desert. And
politically, the Eisenhower plan would not fly,
but there was this kind of idea. And in the
meantime, the Egyptian government did proceed
with its own plans of getting its own nuclear power
plants and what have you. And they went to the
international market with Germany and the States
and England and France. And I took part in that, a
good part of that, until 1968.
What major accomplishments have electrical
engineers in the past 25 years
come up with? Major accomplishments? The major
accomplishments that the WES came up with
have changed the face of the era, in my opinion.
produced a civilization that was never surpassed
in the whole human history in the last few decades.
Solid state electronics and the new technologies
we see and the control system that made you control
all these missiles and all these spaceships and
what have you. marvelous job in changing the way
that everybody lives. Now you see the transistor
radios in any, all the corners of the air, in
deserts, right? Totally isolated places, people
are having radio recorders and radios.
So I think the computer era also has ushered in the
last 20 years and in no time at all is going to
permeate everybody's life. So I think their
contribution is really fascinating in the last
few years. What new fields and discoveries have
you seen open up in the past 25 years in
electro-engineering?
Well, the Second World War, when I came to the
States, I went to the University of Texas in
Austin. Someone suggested in 1950 that I work on
relays, solid-state relays, rather than
electromagnetic relays for my dissertation. And
I said, what's that? So they brought me some
declassified information, two, three volumes,
vehicles from the Navy, it was about transistors.
They were not in books. They were not taught. They
were just coming out in classified material.
I think that was ushering the whole thing, the
whole era that we are in today. It was the post-war
period and the transistors and the like.
did not, for some reason or another, I was not
really fascinated by the idea of going to
electronics and all this at the time. So I did not
really pursue this any further. And then at the
time, we were also hearing about these first
generation computers. We were just talking about
new names and what they do and this kind of thing. So
I think that part, the early 50s, very early 50s,
51, 52, 53, Again, one of the declassified areas, I
mean, the control system of business. When I was
going to school in the early 50s, there were two
books in the control field, two. One was by
Chestnut and Meyer
from GE, and the other was Brown and Camp. Now there
are hundreds of them, and the theory has Again,
most of that work probably was classified in the 45
and 44 era, you see, position control and gun
positioning and the like, you see, this kind of
thing was. So I think that that period, the early
50s, that saw the transistors coming out and saw
computers coming out, control theory
pursued very actively in research, this kind of
thing. was a very, very important period for the
change. The other change that I had just missed
would be in the early 30s, you see, where many of the
accomplishments in my own area, in the power
systems area, were made by people. Somehow in the
late 20s and early 30s, there was a lot of work done,
and the result of it is what we have to really today,
what we have added mostly is... some kind of a
sophisticated formulation of problems and
solutions by computer business, computer
methods, you see. But most of the ideas, the
concepts, the attacks, the approaches to things,
you see, were in the persistent area, were
formulated there with . OK. How did the
switchover, say, from vacuum tubes to
solid-state electronics affect electrical
engineering as a profession?
we just finished talking about that i think it's uh
it just opened whole new horizons as you see and
then when when jack kilby and his work and these
integrated circuits and what have you then you
have calculators in your hand i i bought a hp 45 six
years ago for 400 bucks Today I have a 41 CV for 200.
Have you seen any new discoveries? Have there been
any in, say, the past 20 years?
Discoveries in what? In electrical engineering.
I don't know exactly what you mean by discoveries,
but I'm, again, pointing at the solid-state
electronics area. And... I guess they have these
cars every day. They just do things every day. In
1967, Dr. Jones became the head of the electrical
engineering department at A&M. You came to A&M in
1968 at a time when the department really began to
expand. What were your reasons for coming here? I
came here by accident.
At the time, in 1968, I had
an offer from the United Nations to work as an
advisor, as the advisor to the government of
Indonesia for system development, the United
Nations at the time. They still do. They had a
program called the Technical Assistance Program
And we had a roster of experts from all over the
world in all areas. And whenever a country needed
technical assistance, then the United Nations
would pick one of the experts on the roster and
suggest him to the government, and he would serve
with them. So at the time, I did have
an appointment from the United Nations for
assistance with government. And I was in this
country at the time. And I had talked to Mr.
Dennison. I didn't know Jones. I knew some of the
parties. I finished in Austin, so I'm always
familiar with the area here. And at the time, my two
sons, one was 10 and the other was 8. And the idea
of... of settling down some at this age for them to
go to school and get
educated and raised about 100 miles from her
grandparents and family. My wife is a Texan, and
her family, they all live in Correale County
Corporate School in that area, which is 100 miles
from here, 125 miles from here. A decision that I
just made at the time, you know, because it sounded
to be maybe best for the family, this kind of thing.
Dr. Abe, you've participated in the Electric
Power Research Institute program at A&M since you
first arrived. Could you tell us about that
program? Yeah, the Electric Power Institute, as
you probably know, is an organization within the
EE department. which is supported by the Texas
utilities.
It has been supported since 1966 by 12 Texas
utilities until recently. One of them dropped
out, so we have 11 now. And they pay money annually.
Each utility pays its share annually. And the
purpose is to encourage research in the power
systems area that will give results that will be
useful to the utilities, number one. Number two is
that they would like to encourage students to
enroll in the power systems courses and get into
the power system area. In other words, they'd like
for us to prepare people that they can hire to fill
their positions. So they are interested in
education, in power system education, and in
power system research that has practical value,
not academic or not just that for the purpose of
publishing. They just want something useful that
they can use and people can use. What are some of the
companies that participate in this program? Oh,
they all do, from Houston Library of Power and
Dallas Texas Utilities, Central Power and Light,
all the Texas Utilities, the 12 of them. Started
there. What changes have you seen in that program
since you've been here? The EPI program? Yeah.
Which program? The Electric Power Institute
program. When we started, really, in 66, just
before I came, it was... Professor Dennison, he's
retired now, he retired this year, John S.
Dennison, was here, and I think he was the only one
in there. He started the program there. And then
apparently at the same time, or slightly after
that, Mr. Patton was hired. He didn't have a degree
then. He got his PhD here later on in 1974. But he was
hired. He had his master's from Pittsburgh, and he
was hired here. And then I came in 68. So there was a
few of us where we were deemed as a group at the time.
Over the years, we stayed like this until, I'd say,
75, 74, yeah, something like that. And then we
started hiring more people. So today, we have, I
mean, we just people. We have Dr. Hassani and Dr.
Singh and Dr. Russell and Dr. Wang has been hired
recently. He's a mathematician and mathematics
and systems man, but he works in the nuclear
systems area. And Dr. Chenoweth and myself. We
have six feet. So instead of two or three, now we're
six. The areas of interest also have changed now.
We do have, before we hired new people, we were
interested mostly in power system reliability,
which is the application of probability methods
to calculate indices to tell me whether this
design is reliable or not, will it perform the way I
want it or not, this kind of thing. uh russell and
aksani and all of these we have new areas of
interest one of them is
i go to the dc power electronics in general it's a
power conditioning you know power electronics
which is a new area to us mr aksani works in there and
then we have
Russell was interested in automation and
distribution system automation and using the
microcomputers and the like. So we did expand in
size and interest. Can you give us some examples of
what other researchers in the electrical
engineering department have accomplished at
A&M? The department?
would not really be, I won't be able really to tell
you much about the others. We do have some, an
institute, we have that solar state electronics
institute upstairs, Dr. Parker handles that, and
he should be able to tell you more about it. In the
control area, You see me, I don't know, I mean, you
see me hesitate a little bit here. I don't know how
much you're going to place on this interview, but
you see, the thing that makes me hesitate is that we
had such an experience, you know, recent in the
last few years, you know. Some people are not here
all together. We lost quite a few of our faculty, if
you remember. Last year we lost 30% of our faculty
within a year. So I would not be able to enumerate
what these people have been doing or why they left
or anything like that. But we had some bad
experiences, I would say. And I hope you don't
spread that around. In the mid-60s, very little
money was allotted to research in electrical
engineering at A&M. Today, about $1.4 million is
allotted to research. What effect has this
increase in spending on projects had on the
department? You see, in the late 60s, the whole
department was 25. The personnel were 25 people,
faculty and staff. Two years ago, we reached our
faculty, the research and teaching faculty was 65
people.
And the research was quite a bit of the time they
spent. Many of them were paid of that money you're
talking about. So we did grow, and the money that we
had meant growth, like you see there. and then uh we
lost some of these we lost 20 or something
but they we did grow that and we had more facilities
built that uh so state electronics lab i'm telling
you about their floors was started with doctors
kip porter the man who is now heading the tees he
came here at the same time i came I think it has
expanded quite a bit. It does have a good status. I
talk to people about it.
In 1975, you went on leave for two years as
professor and head of the new Department of
Electrical Engineering at the University of
Kuwait. Can you tell us what differences in
engineering you saw there as compared to here?
Well, the University of Kuwait did not have a
college of engineering altogether. So in 1975, in
August 1975, I walked in the University of Kuwait,
and I was given the keys to a new building where
engineering was supposed to be established.
So I was the first one who walked in the building. in
1975 and at the time they started a mechanical
electrical engineering department and
mechanical union department civil engineering
and chemical engineering only four departments
and it so happened that one the man who was in charge
of mechanical engineering who was head then
walked in with me right after i did was also a
professor here. And we were entrusted, of course,
with the task of designing the curriculum,
specifying and establishing the labs,
the library, and staff. It was a new college
altogether. You see, I got there on the 23rd of
August, 1975. the 15th of september we had
students enrolled you see for the first year so the
the curriculum design and lab facilities and this
faculty that we hired were highly influenced by
the by the system we have here of course as you
suspect when i i i They drove my observations here
and my experience here. In other words, you would
say that their curriculum for electrical
engineering is very similar to ours. It would be. I
suspect that. And then the faculty, the platform
staff, I had to sit all of that. I was supposed to be
there for a year. So after the one year was over,
they did ask the university to leave me there
another year. So the plan for everything, the plan
for the staffing, what faculty members should be
hired when as we go, and which labs should be bought
and constructed and when as we go, all this I had to
do in the two years. And I did draw quite a bit on the
One of the purposes of my mission there really was
to establish some kind of a sister-ship
relationship between the two universities. We
need that. If we have a contact in Kuwait, like the
University of Kuwait, that has a relationship
with an exchange of professors, exchange of what
have you, I think we all gain this. When you
returned to A&M, a trend in enrollment had
started. There were about 110 seniors in the
electrical engineering department in 1979. By
1982, that figure had more than doubled. What has
been the impact of this?
The increase in enrollment, really, is
phenomenal, as we all know.
would not really completely condone
measures of restricting enrollment as such. It
has to be... This is a state institution, as far as
I'm concerned. This is my own opinion. It's a state
institution. It's a rich state institution. It's
not a poor institution. And it's supposed to be
training
sons and daughters of the state of Texas and what
have you, and I just can't see a place like this
restricting enrollment by the means that they are
doing it. But it was a fact, and we had to face it,
that we have many people walking in and we did not
have enough faculty. This is the There was some
talk about not enough space to schedule our
classroom meetings and what have you. There was
some talk like this, and this is why the next
building was built. But I think it is highly
important that we try to hire good faculty, and not
only hire them, be able to retain I mean, we should
have good working conditions and good working
relationships so that we can retain people. And we
can have them work. So devotion rather than being
disappointed, mistreated, what have you. We have
to have good working conditions so that we can
retain good faculty. You're right about it. Now,
what happened when they increased? If you see our
classes now, I teach 338 very often. And we have all
the juniors at any time. So it's 130 people or 125,
this kind of range. When this happened, the
enrollment increase, I did suggest that we put
them all in the same room. And one professor would
teach them. We're doing this with 338, and we're
doing it with some of the non-EE major courses, the
service courses we give to the others. We group
them in the auditorium down there. This is a system
that is new to the United States. In the States,
traditionally, we've had small classes and
personal contacts between the teacher and the
student. We always had a high ratio.
But in Europe it has been the mode of operation for
decades and for maybe some universities for a
thousand years. There is a lecture room and anyone
can walk in and can have a thousand people in it. And
you have a professor there at the very end of it,
talking, and everybody's gaining learning
knowledge, you see, from there. So it's a new kind
of thing for us, really, but it's a very workable
thing. The only thing with it that people should
realize is that the professor in Europe who gives
that lecture is not anyone. You see what I mean? I
mean, if I'm going to have an auditorium with a
thousand people in it and someone's going to talk
about thermodynamics or electrical circuits, he
must be someone who has done it over years. He knows
what he's talking about. He has written it. He has
rehearsed it. He has videotaped it. This caliber
of man is what you need for this kind of lecture. It
cannot work with the idea... with the attitude of
what a fool can do and any other fool can't. Just go
in and teach them the darn thing. So we are in the
process of meeting large classes, elections for
large classes. And it has its pros, it has its cons,
but it is one way of facing the increased
enrollment. You can do that. You can do that. If
your professors would get off their butts, you
see, I mean it. And do not hate teaching and do not
hide behind research. They do nothing, you see.
Some of them just pretend to do research and they
don't. Or whatever they do is garbage, which is
very common. This is very, very common, you see.
And many people try to get out of teaching any way
they can, you see. It happens. Why? I really
believe that we have a lack in the, what would you
call that? A lack of, I hate to say it, devotion. You
see, what happens to me, the way I think about it,
the way I've seen it, the way I think about it, is
that there are several levels of devotion, okay? I
guess the first one is that of the monks in a
monastery. They have nothing but worship. They do
nothing but worship. It is my belief, my
conviction, that the university professors come
next. Are we really that devoted as professors in
this university? This is very important. If we are
not, why are we not that devoted? What is
distracting me from my research and my students. I
worry because there is no fairness here or
whatever is there. What is it? We have to give
people a very good working condition so that they
can come next to the monastery and devotion.
How has the quality of students changed in the past
16 years?
Somehow, I don't want to be critical of the new
generation, but somehow they were, in the past, in
all the time, they were better prepared, a little
bit.
But it is also very fortunate that our own students
now are just as serious as the old ones. I mean, I do
not see any difference between the, I don't want to
say discipline, but discipline. In the classroom
here and 16 years ago, I see them very polite, very
serious. They come to class and they listen and
they're respectful and the what have you. But
somehow the high school education might have
changed a little bit. I don't know. Maybe there are
too many things, many, many new things, you know,
that that interferes with their drilling and
training and this kind of things. Maybe more
sports, more travels, more TV, whatever. Somehow
there's a little bit of a change. The way I see it,
it's not really that major. And I've always
thought that repetition is good. and a review is
good no matter how good you are at it. I do not at all
object or refrain from, in any class, no matter how
high a level they did, of just going back to basics
for a few minutes. There's nothing wrong with
that. But somehow I think the kids are different in
this way. They probably are broader in
culture and education than before. But I wouldn't
say it's a very measured choice. And this school,
we have been reporting that they are really
serious about their studies. How has electrical
engineering curriculum improved over the last 16
years in the department?
We, in 77, when I came back from Kuwait, I did
suggest to Dr. Jones at the time, we had trouble, as
I could feel, Well, let me put it this way. I had a son
at the time who was going to electrical
engineering here. So he finished in 1980, AA. My
second son, I have two boys. My second son finished
last year, AA. So my concern with this department
was not only because I worked here. My own kids were
educated here. So I didn't show concern at the time
to Dr. Jones as a parent and as a colleague that
things are not going well in the way the kids are
being taught here. And I suggested to him that we
establish a curriculum committee that will look
closely at all the syllabi of the courses and the
courses themselves, are they up to date or not.
Should we be updated? Should we introduce new
courses or not? Should we change the core course
requirements, drop one and add one, or what have
you? So we did establish a varying committee that
year, and we still have one now. I chaired it for two
years then. And yeah, we changed. We introduced
new courses continuously. And we have changed,
and we're changing now to the core requirements.
So the curriculum is being dynamic. It's being
updated all the time. It's being looked at. Okay.
How would you rank electrical engineering at A&M
with other schools? Again, what do you rank them
by? Top 20, top 30, top 10? What do you mean by
ranking? Yeah, how you feel that we compare to the
other schools. You see, we were compared last
year, two years ago, nationally,
our graduate program, our department, and they
put us at 69 out of 99.
But that survey was not fair. I mean, I know it was
biased because we were not handled correctly. I
mean, many, many, not only us. But many other
schools, the data about them was not correct. It
was not complete. And I would say that we are better
than 69 out of 99. Where do you think that we should
go on? I would say that knowing the school that I
have in touch with, my colleagues from other
schools in Purdue and Iowa State and Berkeley and
what have you, I would say that we would be in the top
40.
Has
the electrical engineering department at A&M had
any defense contracts since you've been here?
There's some work for the Air Force that they've
been doing all the time. Do you know what for? No.
When did students here first start designing
integrated circuits?
I would not be able to tell you that either.
I would not tell you.
What other changes of any kind have you seen in the
electrical
engineering department? Changes that were very
upsetting to me, and I hope that we get over them,
are still going on today. See, if you look at us, we
are a department that lost one-third of its
faculty last year. The department head that we
had, Mr. Jones, has been terminated. We have an
interim head, and we're looking for a head. So
we're looking for a department head, and we're
looking for a third of our faculty. I think this is a
very sad situation, and I hope we get over it very
soon. Otherwise, we're going to be in trouble for
years to come. What do you think was the cause for
the loss of faculty? The treatment, the working
conditions, the administration. There was no
leadership. There was no leadership. There was
arbitrary decisions. I mean, people cannot be
arbitrarily promoted and paid, you see. I mean, I
can't promote you because I like you and I give you
10% raise and I don't give you anything on no basis.
See, people do not feel secure. And when you're
young, you know, you just run. You run fast when
you're in
a situation like that. Okay. Is there anything
else at all that you'd like to say? i would like to
say that this is the alma mater of my two sons my two
sons my two boys i have a very deep rooted interest
in it okay and until i retire if i'm still here i am
going to do my best and i really hope that it does
come back revive after what we have been in we are we
are not we're coming from a very sad situation that
many of the students are not aware of if you
remember last year you see mr page was changed and
mr john was changed you know we lost five
department heads of state this is what we have
today you don't know about it but this one is i think
this college deserves a much better
administration a much better planning and a much
better future It's a rich college. It has a lot of
devoted kids in it. The kids are serious kids,
polite and serious. I can see any reason why we
cannot really improve our status nationally and
keep our reputation and improve it. Well, thank
you for your time. You bet.